Basic tutorial (#1)
flame-engine/flame_tutorials: tutorials/1_basic_square/README.md

# Basic: Rendering a simple square on the screen

This tutorial will introduce you to:

 - `Game`: The basic class to build a game on, you will understand its structure and how to use it to build a simple game

>  - `GameWidget`: The widget used to place your game on your widget tree

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - `GameWidget`: The widget used to place your game on your Flutter widget tree
```

>  - Basic rendering: You will get introduced to the basics of using `dart:ui` class `Canvas` which is the class which Flame uses for rendering your game.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Basic rendering: You will get introduced to the basics of using the `Canvas` class from `dart:ui` which is the class that Flame uses for rendering your game.
```

> All the code of this tutorial code can be found [here](./code) and is based on Flame `1.0.0-rc8` version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the code of this tutorial code can be found [here](./code) and is based on the Flame `1.0.0-rc8` version.
```

By the end of this tutorial you will have built a simple game that renders a square bouncing on the screen that will look like this:

![Preview](./media/preview.gif)

## Building your first game

`Game` is the most basic class that you can use to build your game, it includes the necessary methods for creating a basic game loop and methods for the lifecycle of a Flame game.

> For more complex games, you will probably want to use `BaseGame`, which has a lot of utilities that will make your life easier on more complex game, we will cover that on furter tutorials, for this one the `Game` class will be enough for the concepts that you will learn here.

Reviewer: And also this comment is exactly what I wanted to see in this tutorial! :raised_hands:

> For more complex games, you will probably want to use `BaseGame`, which has a lot of utilities that will make your life easier on more complex game, we will cover that on furter tutorials, for this one the `Game` class will be enough for the concepts that you will learn here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more complex games, you will probably want to use `BaseGame`, which has a lot of utilities that will make your life easier on more complex game, we will cover that on later tutorials, for this one the `Game` class will be enough for the concepts that you will learn here.
```

Reviewer: futher is spelled further, but I think later is better suited here

> For more complex games, you will probably want to use `BaseGame`, which has a lot of utilities that will make your life easier on more complex game, we will cover that on later tutorials, for this one the `Game` class will be enough for the concepts that you will learn here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more complex games, you will probably want to use `BaseGame`, which has a lot of utilities that will make your life easier. We will cover that on later tutorials, for this one the `Game` class will be enough for the concepts that you will learn here.
```

> `GameWidget` is, like its name suggest, a Flutter widget that will run your game and place it inside the Flutter widget tree.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`GameWidget` is, like the name suggests, a Flutter widget that will run your game and place it inside the Flutter widget tree.
```

> As a first step, lets just get a Game instance running, for that we will need to create our own class that extends Flame's Game class, implement its methods, and pass an instance of that Game to a GameWidget. Something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a first step, lets just get a Game instance running. For that, we will need to create our own class that extends Flame's Game class, implement its methods, and pass an instance of that Game to a GameWidget. Something like this:
```

```dart
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flame/game.dart';

void main() {
  final myGame = MyGame();
  runApp(
    GameWidget(
      game: myGame,
    ),
  );
}

class MyGame extends Game {
  @override
  void update(double dt) { /* TODO */ }

>  }

Reviewer 2: @erickzanardo please remove this line number 41 as it is incorrect. thanks!

Author: Fixed, took me longer than I am comfortable to accept to realize that this `}` was the problem.

  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) { /* TODO */ }
}
```

> That is it! If you run this, you will see just an empty black screen for now, but now we have the bare bones needed to start implementing our game.

Reviewer 2: 1. bare-bones
2. bare-bones is an adj, not a noum

Author: Changed to bare-bones. Not sure I got the item 2.

Before going further, it is important to explain what those two methods mean.

> Flame's `Game` class is an implementation of a Game Loop, which the basic structure on which most games are built on. It is called a Game Loop because it really works as an infinite loop that will continue to iterate as long as the game is running. This loop can be categorized as followed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Flame's `Game` class is an implementation of a Game Loop, which the basic structure on which most games are built on. It is called a Game Loop because it really works as an infinite loop that will continue to iterate as long as the game is running. The loop goes through the following steps:
```

 - 1: Take input from the player
 - 2: Process the logic for the next frame
 - 3: Render the frame.

In this tutorial we will focus on both step two and three.

> To process the logic of the game, we use the `update` method, which is ran always before the frame is rendered and receives a single argument, a `double` value called `dt` (delta time), which is the amout of seconds between the current iteration and the last one. This delta time is very important so we can always know how to correctly calculate movement, animations and etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To process the logic of the game, we use the `update` method, which always runs before the frame is rendered and receives a single argument, a `double` value called `dt` (delta time), which is the amount of seconds between the current iteration and the last one. This delta time is very important so we can always know how to correctly calculate the speed of movement, animations and etc.
```

> To render the frame, we use the `render` method, this method receives a single argument which is an instance of a `dart:ui` `Canvas` class. With that instance we can basically render anything we want. It is important to not have any game logic in this method, we should only contain render instructions, any game logic should be put in the `update` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To render the frame, we use the `render` method, this method receives a single argument which is an instance of a `dart:ui` `Canvas` class. With that instance we can basically render anything we want. It is important to not have any game logic in this method, it should only contain render instructions, any game logic should be put in the `update` method.
```

Now that we have a better understanding of how the game structure works, lets start to plan our game.

> So, lets think on what variables and data structure we would need. For that, lets recap what we are building: A simple game where a square keeps bouncing forever from one side of the screen to the other. Thinking on this, we will need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, lets think on what variables and data structure we would need. For that, lets recap what we are building: A simple game where a square keeps bouncing forever from one side of the screen to the other. Thinking about this, we will need:
```

 - A constant to tell us the speed of the square in logical pixels per second.

>  - A variable to inform which direction the square is moving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - A variable to keep track of which direction the square is moving.
```

 - A structure to represent our square, which has a position and dimensions.

With that in mind, check the example below, note the comments for explanations on each code section.

```dart
class MyGame extends Game {
  // A constant speed, represented in logical pixels per second
  static const int squareSpeed = 400;

  // To represent our square we are using the Rect class from dart:ui
  // which is a handy class to represent this type of data. We will be
  // seeing other types of data classes in the future, but for this
  // example, Rect will do fine for us.
  late Rect squarePos;

  // To reprent our direction, we will be using an int value, where 1 means
  // going to the right, and -1 going to the left, this may seems like a too much
  // simple way of representing a direction, and indeed it is, but this will
  // will work fine for our small example and will make more sense when we implement
  // the update method
  int squareDirection = 1;

  // The onLoad method is where all of the game initialization is supposed to go

>   // for this example, you may think that this square could just be initialized on the field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // For this example, you may think that this square could just be initialized on the field
```

  // declaration, and you are right, but for learning purposes and to present the life cycle method
  // for this example we will be initializing this field here.
  @override
  Future<void> onLoad() async {
    squarePos = Rect.fromLTWH(0, 0, 100, 100);
  }

  // Update and render ommited
}
```

> Right, now we have all the data and variables we need to start implementing our game, for the next step, lets just draw our little square on the screen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Right, now we have all the data and variables we need to start implementing our game. For the next step, lets draw our little square on the screen.
```

```dart
  @override
  void render(Canvas canvas) {

>     // Canvas is a class from dart:ui and is reponsible for all the renderings on Flame

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Canvas is a class from dart:ui and is it responsible for all the rendering inside of Flame
```

Reviewer 2: after spydons: `is it` => `it is` :p

    //
    // BasicPalette is a help class from Flame, which provides default, pre built instances

>     // of Paints that can be used by your game

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // of Paint that can be used by your game
```

>     canvas.drawRect(squarePos, BasicPalette.white.paint);

Reviewer 2: extract to a constant

Author: fixed

  }
}
```

You may now be seeing a static white square being rendered on the top left corner of your screen, which is not that cool, so, to finish our example, lets add some movement to the game and implement our update method:

```dart
  @override
  void update(double dt) {

>     // Here we move our square by applying our iteration delta time (dt) to our

Reviewer 2: by calculating our movement using the iteration delta time and our speed variable and direction.

Author: Done

>     // speed variable and direction. Note that the Rect class class is immutable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // speed variable and direction. Note that the Rect class is immutable
```

    // and the translate method returns a new Rect instance for us, so we just

>     // re assign it to our square variable

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // re-assign it to our square variable
```

    //
    // It is important to remember that the result of the execution of this method,
    // must be the game state (in our case our rect, direction variabables) updated to be
    // consistent of how it should be after the amount of time stored on the dt variable,

>     // that way you game will always run smooth and  consistent even when a FPS drop or peak happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // that way your game will always run smooth and consistent even when a FPS drop or peak happen.
```

    //

>     // To exemplify that, if our square moves at 200 logical pixels per second, and half a second

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // To illustrate this, if our square moves at 200 logical pixels per second, and half a second
```

    // has passed, our square should have moved 100 logical pixels on this iteration
    squarePos = squarePos.translate(square_speed * squareDirection * dt, 0);

    // This simple condition verifies if the square is going right, and has reached the end of the screen
    // if so, we just invert our direction
    //
    // Note here that we have used the variable size, which is a variable provided
    // by the Game class which contains the size in logical pixels that the game is currently using
    if (squareDirection == 1 && squarePos.right > size.x) {
      squareDirection = -1;
    // This does the same, but now checking the left direction
    } else if (squareDirection == -1 && squarePos.left < 0) {
      squareDirection = 1;
    }
  }
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I would add a penultimate paragraph saying, now we run again and get the rectangle bouncing off as we wanted!

Author: Done

![Preview](./media/preview.gif)

## Building your first game

`Game` is the most basic class that you can use to build your game, it includes the necessary methods for creating a basic game loop and methods for the lifecycle of a Flame game.

For more complex games, you will probably want to use `BaseGame`, which has a lot of utilities that will make your life easier. We will cover that on later tutorials, for this one the `Game` class will be enough for the concepts that you will learn here.

`GameWidget` is, like the name suggests, a Flutter widget that will run your game and place it inside the Flutter widget tree.

As a first step, lets just get a Game instance running. For that, we will need to create our own class that extends Flame's Game class, implement its methods, and pass an instance of that Game to a GameWidget. Something like this:

```dart
import 'package:flutter/material.dart';
import 'package:flame/game.dart';

void main() {
  final myGame = MyGame();
  runApp(
    GameWidget(
      game: myGame,
    ),
  );
}

class MyGame extends Game {
  @override
  void update(double dt) { /* TODO */ }

> 

Reviewer 2: nit: double empty lines :p
